Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we're going
to start down the path of explicitly addressing
the issues with real numbers real numbers can be
introduced in a number of different ways that I've
pointed out and the first way that we're going
to look at starting today is the idea of a real
number or irrational number as an infinite decimal
we already saw that an ordinary rational number
like 13 over 8 can be represented as a decimal
number like this under certain conditions when
the denominator had a certain form then we could
actually divide and get a finite decimal like in
this case one point six two five we call such
rational numbers decimal numbers and then we
also had look at repeating decimals something
like thirteen over seven can be expressed as a
repeating decimal where you have a period like
this that gets repeated over and over again
both of these expressions were in the context of
finite expressions because well we can write them
all down in a finite way using this / bar notation
the current understanding of decimals traces back
to an interesting Flemish mathematician Simon
Stevin who lived in this period 1548 to 1620
that he was really the first person to advocate
the modern theory of real numbers as infinite
decimals Steffen contributed to mathematics in
a number of other ways he investigated the tides
relationship with the moon he was an engineer
and rather practical person and he for example
created something called a land yacht which
is a sort of a boat on wheels with sails that
quite fast along the beach which was quite popular
back in those days so in this work DNA which is I
think a Dutch for the art of tenths written
in 1585 he introduced the idea that we could
possibly get away with doing arithmetic only with
integers so instead of having to deal with these
difficult fractions that people at that time found
difficult to work with he said we can all do it
with basically hindu-arabic notation as long as
we are willing to think about decimal numbers in
the hindu-arabic form extending indefinitely well
we've already seen an example of that the thirteen
over seven repeated fraction could if you like
be interpreted as something that goes on forever
more and more and more in that direction just
with the same pattern repeated over and over
again but Stephan realized that a lot of other
irrational numbers which were popular at that
time could also be thought of in terms of the
hindu-arabic decimal notation so for example root
two you could actually calculate root two using
the square root algorithm and get one point four
one four two one three you would get a sequence
like this and the more you computed the further
you could go and expanding that decimal root
three you can get a decimal for that one point
seven three two zero five zero and again you
can carry on the algorithm to proceed as far
as you like or root five two point two three six
zero six seven and so on another ended up being
other important numbers notably pi and E and to a
lesser extent log ten that also had very explicit
formulas for them that ultimately allowed people
to write down the decimal expansions of them the
familiar 3.1415926 and so on for pi 2.71828
one for a lawn of 10 or log of 10 2.30 2 5
8 5 so Stefan said look all we have to do is do
arithmetic with these decimals basically in the
sense of the hindu-arabic way of multiplying and
adding and then we dispense with fractions it was
very practically minded person he actually wanted
to empower ordinary people to do arithmetic with
a wider range of numbers so now that we had these
irrational numbers on the board here it's perhaps
interesting to point out that in this rather short
list we have the great majority of irrational
numbers that are actually used in practice so if
you look in mathematics textbooks and you circle
every time you see an irrational number the vast
majority of them will be closely related to these
six numbers here maybe slight variance like two
pi instead of pi or root three on two instead
of that one or one plus root five on four but
still very closely related to these ones which
is another bit of support for my claim that the
the amount of examples in in modern mathematics is
often a little bit weak we don't have as many good
examples in many situations as we perhaps ought to
all right so what exactly is going on with these
these infinite decimals clearly there's something
that has to be explained these three dots what
exactly are we talking about well that's a very
interesting and important and ultimately
contentious question what exactly is an
infinite decimal so this is the question that
we want to start to address we need to have
very precise definition of what this object is
and this is the kind of thing that we're after
this is what it looks like we've got a decimal
point we've got a finite number of digit to the
left we have an infinite number of digits to the
right and perhaps there is a plus or minus sign
in front the question is what exactly are we
talking about here and there are essentially
these days three different answers three very
important different directions of going in terms
of understanding what is an infinite decimal here
are the three different rows that we can go down
the first which is the most popular and the most
well accepted these days is the approach what I
call infinite choice it's also sometimes called
quasi combinatorial all right so in this approach
we take the following position that an infinite
decimal like this is first of all a finite choice
of sign so you either choose the plus or the minus
and if you choose the plus you don't actually have
to write it down but if you choose the - you have
to write it down then you have to choose a number
K and you have to choose digits B 0 B 1 up to
be K now the digits are always numbers from 0
to 9 okay so you chosen the sign you chosen
K you chosen a certain number of digits to
the left of the decimal point and now you need
to choose an infinite number of digits a 1 a 2
a 3 and so on to the right of the decimal point
and these digits can each be chosen arbitrarily
and independently so you choose digit a 1 make
up some number some digit between 0 & 9 let's
say 5 and then you choose a - say 3 and then you
choose a 3 say 7 and then a 4 maybe that's 7 as
well and you keep going there doesn't have to be a
pattern to your choices there can be a pattern but
if there is a pattern you can keep it to your
of ultimately what's required is the infinite
string of choices that you're making and that
is what an infinite decimal is then there's a
second position the second position we might call
the algorithmic or the constructive position it's
very much like the first one except for the
crucial part of addressing the digits to the
right of the decimal point with this algorithmic
or constructive point of view we insist that the
digits a 1 a 2 and a 3 have to be determined
by a finite algorithm there has to be a finite
algorithm or procedure or you can think of a
formula you can think of a computer program
some finite way of specifying how these digits
are generated so we don't have to actually have
the digits themselves all in a row we just need
this finite piece of paper that tells us how
to generate the digits that's a rather different
approach to what the infinite decimal actually is
then there's a third position which we might call
the finite issed or the rational position in this
position infinite decimals are not required
and they are deemed illogical so this position
asserts that both these positions are unfounded
mathematically that both of these positions are
problematic and it says in fact guys we do not
need infinite decimals in either of these forms
right so I think you probably can guess which
position I am going to adopt but before I do
that we're going to have to have a very good
look at both of these two positions both first
two positions towards infinite decimals arguably
involve some meta mathematical aspects and in my
opinion students ought to be clearly informed of
the pros and cons of each of the positions at some
point in the early undergraduate years or perhaps
in the late high school years students should be
clearly instructed that there is a fork in the
road here the road of mathematics that we've all
been traveling down together Forks and there
are different directions to go on now these
different directions correspond exactly to these
three different approaches to what is an infinite
decimal and I think students ought to be made more
aware of these possibilities and there ought to be
a wider engagement of the issues the pros and cons
for each one of these alternatives students ought
to know that this is a very important Junction
point so what we're going to do is we're going
to now look at the pros and cons of these three
positions starting today in this video with the
first position the infinite choice position so
let's start with the pros there are some very
significant advantages to thinking about infinite
decimals in the infinite choice frame of mind
the first pro is that this approach most closely
resembles the definition of a finite integer or
decimal number if you have a finite integer while
all integers are finite say seven thousand five
hundred and thirteen or a decimal number eight
point seven one to four then to specify those
numbers ultimately what we want is to list the
digits involved so this number is expressed or
specified by listing the seven the five the
one and the three and other description of
this number is somehow secondary for example
I could also describe this as saying well this
is the digits consisting of the three Prime's
less than ten in descending order with the the
smallest nonzero natural number stuck in between
the last two prongs that would be another more
long-winded description of this but it's clearly
not as preferable as saying seven five one
three similarly here if this is the answer for a
question on a test I expect my students to write
down eight point seven one two four and anything
else that they write down I probably will not
accept if you say eight point seven one two three
plus point zero zero zero one well that might
indirectly represent the same number but I'm not
going to accept that as an answer I want exactly
the string of digits that appear in exactly the
right order and so the infinite choice approach to
infinite decimals adopts the same point of view it
says that to specify an infinite decimal what we
need to do is we need to say what all the digits
are in the right order so this is one five point
one four eight eight zero two and then we keep
on going maybe there's a six seven nine and so on
so this specification of the digits is very much
in keeping with what we do with finite decimals
the second advantage is that the representation is
almost unique there's pretty well only one way of
specifying an infinite choice into the decimal
so equality between infinite decimals is easy
to detect there is an important qualification
though that we agree that something like three
point seven nine nine nine 9 where the nines keep
on going is equal to three point eight zero zero
zero zero zero where the zeros keep on going so
that's the one place where infinite decimal has
an ambiguous representation there are two ways of
representing it and that's of course exactly when
it's a finite decimal of this kind so it's exactly
the finite decimals sitting inside the infinite
decimals which have these ambiguous aspects to
it but otherwise the representation is unique and
now we come to what's perhaps the most important
advantage in this infinite choice approach the
advantage is that this idea or concept turns a
process into a number let me try to explain what
I mean by that so in certain situations we have
problems which we cannot exactly solve but we can
move towards a solution and we've seen that with
regard to Newton's method so for example suppose
we have this cubic equation represented by that
graph and suppose that we're interested in finding
it's zero say that the biggest zero that one
that's right there so if you look back a few
videos into my videos that have Newton's method
in their title you'll see that we've outlined
a rather explicit procedure that allows us to
generate rational approximations to a number that
satisfies this equation we may not in fact ever be
able to get a number that exactly satisfies this
equation but we can generate numbers step by step
that more and more closely solve this equation
geometrically we may start with a value of x say
r1 and then using Newton's method we generate r2
and then r3 and we can keep going generating more
and more rational members that are getting closer
and closer to having the property that they're
both on the x-axis and on this curve so we get
successive approximations R 1 R 2 R 3 and so on
all rational so when we convert these numbers
into decimal form giving us repeating decimals
then we notice that the initial strings of these
decimals start agreeing the difference between R
1 and R 2 and R 3 becomes manifested further and
further along in the decimal representations so
in other words as we keep going in the process we
are essentially generating more and more digits
in this infinite decimal and what we are able to
do with this idea is to turn this process into
a number the whole process of Newton's method
gets encoded in the single decimal admittedly it
does go on forever it has an infinite amount of
information in it in some sense and that number
can then be used according to this concept as a
number we can do arithmetic with this number we
can see where it is we can compare it with other
numbers and so on alright so a process has been
turned into a number this is an aspect of this
which has the widest ramifications and seems to
convey a lot of benefits and two very important
results which are consequences of what we said on
the previous page are these two the intermediate
value theorem and the fundamental theorem of
algebra they are both results that depend on this
notion of infinite choice decimal number so it may
be a little while since you've done calculus or
perhaps you haven't calculus so we don't need to
know exactly what the intermediate value theorem
says but it's roughly that if it looks like there
is a solution then there is a solution somewhat
more precisely if you have a continuous function
f of X with here its graph and I won't exactly
define what this means but you can think of it as
something that you can draw on the page without
lifting your pen then if you have some points a
and B on the x axis so that the functions value at
a is less than zero and the functions value at B
is bigger than zero then there's going to be some
number C in between a and B that has the property
that F of C is zero in other words there's a zero
to the function somewhere between a and B so this
result is intimately connected with this infinite
process business generating a number so we can get
at such a thing by successively bracketing so you
can imagine sort of bracketing instead of choosing
a and B we choose a1 and b1 which are closer still
less than zero still bigger than zero on both
sides if we keep moving closer and closer and
closer we can generate this sequence of numbers
and then the idea of an infinite choice infinite
decimal allows us to then deduce that there is
actually a number that has this limiting property
that we want so the intermediate value theorem is
intimately connected and dependent on this idea
of an infinite decimal the fundamental theorem of
algebra let me say it in the 18th century way any
polynomial with real coefficients that is with
coefficients which are these real numbers can
be factored into linear and quadratic factors
remarkable and highly non-obvious theorem which
again ultimately rests on this this infinite
process into a number formulation that that
is encoded in the infinite choice approach to
decimals so those two theorems that I mentioned
are just the start of a whole range of theorems
in analysis which ultimately come back to the
the notion of an infinite decimal you need the
notion of a real number to be able to establish
these theorems as they are usually stated okay
we will see later on that there's often alternate
ways of stating the same theorems which does
not require infinite decimals okay so it's not
the case that these theorems absolutely require
this notion but the current approach definitely
does build on infinite decimals as infinite choice
creations another advantage of the infinite choice
approach is that the truncation of an infinite
decimal yields our rational number approximation
so for example that infinite decimal that we
created from the cubic equation alpha equals
four point six nine six three nine two and so
on an applied mathematician can come along and
say oh look we're just going to chop this off
and ignore all these other infinite amount of
tail digits there but to an applied mathematician
these extra digits just amount to more and more
delicate information regarding very very small
small changes in position the further we go here
the more irrelevant these digits are to an applied
mathematician and I'm talking about physicist or
chemist or computer scientist here possibly also
so this is very useful that we can just take one
of these abstract theoretical pure mathematical
ideas just truncate ignore the tail and we get
something practical that's important that can
be used in calculations that we can actually
work with so there's a reasonably close connection
between the applied maths and the pure maths point
of view on the decimal level and finally I'm going
to mention this more curious aspect to things that
a single infinite decimal number encodes generally
an infinite amount of information so this was made
explicit by a well-known analyst Emil Borel
around 1927 he created a thought experiment
really which is now called Burrell's know-it-all
number sometimes and he said all right what we
can do is is this so list all possible questions
in English so how do we do that well you can if
you've given a question in English and let's say
that it's a question that has a yes-or-no answer
so you write down a question in English that has
a yes-or-no answer for example is 1 plus 1 equal
to 2 question mark all right then you count the
number of letters that you used to write down
that question and then you order all the questions
in the order of the size of the question so the
smallest questions first and the longer questions
further and further down our list with questions
that have the same number of letters ok you just
order them as a dictionary would okay so we have
a list of all possible questions in English
and then Braille says all right now define
a new real number define it to be the number zero
point A one A two A three and so on where a I the
I digit is either 0 or 1 depending whether the
answer to the is question is either no or yes so
it's going to be a decimal number that only has
zeros and ones as its digits and if you want to
know the answer to the eighth question you just
go to the I digit and have a look to see whether
it's 0 or 1 well in fact Burrell's attitude to
what real number is rather interesting because
it changed rather dramatically during his career
he was initially rather a for an advocate of real
numbers in this proof infinite sense but as he
got older he changed his mind and became more
and more skeptical about whether this really
made sense and this number that he defined was
really an attempt on his part to suggest that this
whole thing doesn't really work because this is so
obviously silly you know one can talk about such
a number but it's it's really a sort of like at
the level of philosophy not mathematics all right
so although there are still people today who look
at this and say oh there's not interesting you
know we have a single real number that contains
all possible information or something like that
but Burrell's approach was that this really shows
that there's something fishy about this idea of
having an infinite amount of information contained
in one single number so that's been a list of
advantages in thinking about a real number as
an infinite decimal involving an infinite number
of choices of all the digits one at a time however
there are some strong disadvantages to this
approach so let's have a look at the cons now
the first con is that it is it actually impossible
to explicitly exhibit such an infinite decimal you
cannot actually write it down such an infinite
decimal and show it to us so that we can all see
it for example here is an infinite decimal three
eight nine one so three thousand eight hundred
ninety one point two zero zero four zero five
six two four one three and this is part of a tape
there's an infinite tape that goes infinitely
in that direction and someone has gone through
here and chosen each one of these digits and we
don't know what they had in mind maybe they were
flipping a coin maybe they had some pattern in the
back of their minds may they were just thinking of
the next number that came into their minds we
don't know but there's some sequence of digits
that goes on and on forever in this direction and
when we say on and on forever well this clearly
is a meta mathematical thing it's not something
that we can actually demonstrate in our universe
there are no infinite tapes there are no tapes
that go on you know past the end of time it's
impossible to actually write down such a number
in its entirety so it means that mathematics now
is at a different level that it was before we
are no longer just restricting our attention to
objects that can be written down explicitly
to computations that we can hand to someone
else and say have a look check this we are now at
some kind of thought experiment level where we're
entertaining these notions which are in some sense
metaphysical the point is you cannot actually
exhibit explicitly such an infinite decimal second
point it is impossible to define the operations
of addition and multiplication on such infinite
decimals we won't even speak of subtraction and
division so why is that why can't we perform
these operations well we saw already when we
were talking about repeating decimals or rational
numbers that defining addition and multiplication
was already a rather delicate topic for repeating
decimals so we indicated roughly how that would go
but we didn't actually do it precisely because of
all these carries and having to keep track of how
the carries from the right effect things as we go
on well here with these infinite decimals which
are not necessarily repeating for which there's
not necessarily any pattern to them the problem
becomes even more more difficult let's illustrate
how are we going to add this one and this one and
by the way this one is the same as this one I
just pull the tape over a little bit to show
you a little bit more of that infinite decimal but
you have to remember this thing goes on infinitely
in that direction supposedly and here's another
one also going on infinitely in that direction
and there's no necessary rhyme or reason to these
digits they just are okay so how do we propose to
add these two things the problem is we have to
specify an algorithm for doing this I claim such
an algorithm is not possible let's have a look
let's try to do it here and we'll try to do what
pretty well the only thing we can we're going to
adopt the hindu-arabic approach we're going to
proceed left to right because we can't start
on the right but we will be conscious of the
fact that carries will be coming in from the right
that we're going to have to use to modify things
that we've already written down so here there's
no thousand so here's there's three thousand so
we'd want to write a three but then we look at the
next one we see how that's going to be eight and
seven that's going to be fifteen with a carry of
one so I'm going to put a 4 here not a 3 ok I'd
like to write 5 here but I should check the next
digit first okay so maybe temporarily think of a 5
but the next digit is a 9 ok so that 9 there means
I better go one more digit to see what happens the
next digit is also a 9 ok so I need to go one more
to see what happens the next digit is an 8 ok that
8 there means that there's going to be no carry to
that 9 that really will be a 9 that really will be
a 9 and that really will be a 5 good ok so this
2 plus 6 was an 8 and is there a carrier at the
next level no there isn't because that's going
to be something like 1 so there's an 8 there and
then there's a 1 not give me any carry I have to
keep looking to the next term on the right to see
if there's a carry 0 3 that's 4 and then there's
going to be oh here's a 9 4 plus 5 is 9 the next
one is zero plus nine is another nine the next one
is an eleven okay so that 11 makes a carry to that
nine making it a 10 making that 9 a 10 making
that 3 a 4 okay the five and six was an 11 that
was a 1 and then there's a 7 next so there's a 1
there and then there's a 7 because the next one
is 4 and then there's next 1 is 4 well but wait
a minute that 4 therefore plus 0 is followed by
a 1 plus 8 which is 9 and the next one is 3 plus
6 which is also 9 and then 7 plus 2 that's also 9
0 plus 9 that's also 9 8 plus 1 another 9 4 plus
5 there's another 9 2 plus 7 that's another 9 I'm
sorry I'm stuck right here at this point right
here because I have followed it a bunch of nines
I need to know what the next one is to determine
whether these nines are going to cascade and turn
that that thing which is currently a 4 into a 5 or
whether the next one is going to be something less
than 9 which case there will be a whole bunch of
90 and a 4 so I'm forced to move the tape over I
need more information about the tape to be able to
determine that digit in the sum and here's where
the problem is all right the problem is I can
move the tape over but this perverse pattern of
these things adding up to 9 can persist I could
move this over 10 feet and it might be that all
of these digits adding up to 9 keeps on going
get total nine nine nine nine nine nine nine I'm
starting to think there's some kind of conspiracy
the person who gave this number and the person who
gave this number they conspire to make this job
difficult for me by arranging that their totals
are going to be nines so how am I going to solve
this problem how am I going to say precisely how
to find that digit well I can't say look for the
next three miles because the next three miles
might not be enough I may have to move this thing
over a hundred light years before this sequence of
corresponding nines actually finishes and changes
but here's the painful possibility it's possible
that the two people who were responsible
in creating these infinite decimals they
each had independent choices they could have been
conspiring so that this pattern of numbers adding
up to nines goes on forever so even though we may
look at one of the strings and see just sort of
a random bunch of digits nevertheless the two
strings are correlated so that this pattern of
adding up two nines keeps on going to forever and
that means that I'm never in a position of finally
having read the whole thing and being able to say
ah now I know that's a five or four you might say
well can I ask these guys what the pattern is
maybe on the back of the strip of the paper
there's a little footnote that tells me what's the
rule that generates this pattern but there is no
such a rule that was the whole point we said that
these digits were going to be chosen arbitrarily
and independently same with this one so there's
no way for us to predict there's no way for us to
look at the pattern or look for a pattern that
can help us to decide whether these nines are
going to continue or not so this is hopeless we
are not in a position of necessarily being able
to determine that digit right there now you might
argue well this is this is maybe technically true
but it's such an extreme case hi how often how
likely is it that you're going to get such nines
occurring in the in the common sums well actually
the fact that these things go on infinitely means
that actually it will be very likely that there
will be long periods of time even if these two
numbers were completely uncorrelated and these
two people who created these numbers had nothing
to do with each other there will still be periods
of time when they just happened coincidentally to
create numbers whose sum x' added up to 9 for
a whole large number of strings now I'm talking
not just about you know a string of 10 or 20 I'm
talking about a string of 10 or 20 light years
this will happen it will happen almost certainly
if you have two infinite strings of digits because
infinity is so much more than 20 light years 20
light years looks like a lot to us but compared
to infinity it's infinitesimally small all right
so this is the kind of abstract argument that one
uses one one when works with these infinite things
supposedly okay they're not really arguments that
I believe in because I don't believe in infinity
but I'm sort of playing along here with the
standard dogma all right so the point is that you
cannot prescribe a method to add and subtract a
ssin is even worse to add or multiply to infinite
decimals it does not exist so as a necessary
consequence of that it becomes impossible to
establish the laws of arithmetic with such
infinite decimals now at this point here I think
any reasonable judge would say let's halt the
proceedings if you've got a number system in which
you cannot actually exhibit even one number where
it's impossible to add or multiply such numbers
and when you can't prove the laws of arithmetic
then you clearly do not have a number system and
doesn't matter how supposedly attractive this
might be to try to prove the various theorems
that you would like to have proven still the
logical structure is not there and the judge
would probably stop me and say Norman you do
not need to go further but let us go further
anyway there are serious other difficulties
with infinite choice infinite decimals so one
additional problem is that even our ordinary
numbers that we like such as integers and rational
numbers require an infinite presentation in this
context so what we're usually calling nineteen is
represented in this infinite decimal formulation
as nineteen point zero zero zero zero zero zero
zero zero zero zero zero you're actually obliged
to specify each one of those zeros in other words
you still have to create an infinite tape with an
infinite amount of zeros on it why because we have
not allowed ourselves the possibility of having a
little footnote on the tape that says oh by the
way at this point after here all the entries
are zero that was not part of the definition of
an infinite choice infinite decimal you know in
order to specify the decimal we have to specify
each one of the digits whether we like to or not
so even our fractions and integers become these
unwieldy complicated things instead of the nice
things that they used to be another difficulty
is that it's impossible to tell when two such
infinite decimals are equal I remind you that
if you have two fractions a over b and c over
d that they are equal precisely when ad minus
bc equals zero this is a cut-and-dried concrete
way of telling whether two fractions or rational
numbers are the same how do you tell whether two
infinite choice infinite decimals are the same so
here's one and here's another well they certainly
look to be the same up to this point but that's
only the very start of these strings if we pull
tapes further get a few more hundred entries
then perhaps still all the digits agree it's
easy enough to tell when they are not equal so
what at the first point where they disagree we
can say immediately these two numbers are not
equal so that is possible to do but if they do
happen to be equal how could we possibly tell
that it's an infinite amount of tape we're not
capable of looking through the infinite amount
of tape in a finite amount of time and asserting
that yes these are equal so we've discussed some
of the inconsistencies just within the framework
of infinite decimals themselves but there are lots
of disadvantages that infiltrate to other branches
of mathematics once you accept the idea of real
number as an infinite decimal in this way and this
is actually a quite a long list that I could go
through and I've just cut it down so to keep the
list manageable alright so one of the really key
points is that the number theoretical subtleties
inherent in many geometrical and analytic
situations becomes lost and so there's much to
say about this let me just give you an idea about
this so suppose we look at the lemniscate and the
folium of descartes and we ask well do these
things meet and where of course they do meet at
0 0 but looks certainly like they meet at 2 other
points now Newton's method would allow us to find
some approximate rational solutions to those two
curves so using Newton's method we can generate
infinite decimals that represent these points
of intersection so the points of intersection
arise as we've seen before as a consequence of
this infinite process of Newton's method being
converted into real numbers however there's an
interesting number theoretical question here
the number theoretical question is do these curves
actually meet over the rational numbers and that's
a interesting number theoretical question and
if they don't meet one can ask well what kind of
extension feels what kind of algebraic extension
fields are required in order to have a larger
arena in which they do meet so there's natural
number theory associated to this kind of question
which is finessed by the approach to real numbers
the approach to real numbers says we're not going
to worry about fractions we're just going to
convert everything to these infinite decimals
if necessary and a number theoretical content is
subsequently lost so geometry gets actually dumbed
down this way there's a lot of geometry where
there's these interesting number theoretical
aspects which are hidden from the current view
because of the reliance on real numbers as
infinite decimals related to that is the issue of
trigonometry which is of course close to my heart
so trigonometry loses almost all its theoretical
interest whenever you have a trigonometric problem
these days students are oriented to look for a
decimal number answer get your calculator get
something to ten decimal places that's the
answer in fact the the real the real answer
is not a decimal with ten digits okay the real
answer is something more subtle with some number
theoretical content which of course depends on the
problem but the whole subject of trigonometry has
this interesting theoretical aspect come almost
completely invisible to the modern mathematician
and last on my list is this sort of meta thought
that creating a mathematical object by pretending
that one can do something that one can't smacks of
arrogance to say all right well I'm going to think
about an infinite string of digits that I'm unable
to imagine creating that's not something that you
can actually do but you're pretending that you can
do it so we are not gods we do not need to pretend
that we are at the level of the gods or God we
are human beings and our mathematics should be
appropriately modest and sensible so I present
to you the pros and cons of our first approach
to infinite decimals and it's important to realize
that although there's almost no discussion about
this very important issue today in the year 2012
the situation has not always been so a hundred
years ago around the turn of the 19th century
there was extensive discussion about this kind
of issue and related things so these things were
hotly debated and very prominent mathematicians
opposed the idea of an infinite choice infinite
decimal these days there is a uniform status quo
almost with just a few exceptions of a handful of
mathematicians around the world most people accept
the infinite choice infinite decimals approach to
real numbers and the justification that has been
created to substantiate this and to overcome some
of the difficulties that I've shown you is through
an elaborate axiomatic framework mathematicians
are not stupid they realize that this theory is
dubious and so what they have done is they have
created a rather elaborate axiomatic framework
and that axiomatic framework is something
that one can study in set theory and logic
and its purported aim is to create a framework for
mathematics but its initial aims we're very much
directed towards solving the problems overcoming
the difficulties with real numbers as infinite
decimals prominent amongst these axioms is this
axiom of choice the axiom of choice manifests
itself in mathematics in many ways but its primary
role okay its primary role is exactly here at the
level of infinite decimals and real numbers it
essentially asserts as a matter of faith or belief
that it is possible to choose an infinite number
of digits arbitrarily and independently and that
a legitimate mathematical object results this is
a key philosophical point are we or are we not in
a position to be able to specify a first digit a
second digit a third digit a fourth digit and so
on to infinity and are we allowed to call that
specification a new mathematical object a real
number the axiom of choice says that yes we are
so it is a statement of belief and its primary
objective is to allow the building of this real
number system we're talking about axiomatic a lot
more later on I just want to alert you that the
axiom of choice is though you may see it in lots
of fancy versions it's real aim right the primer
aim is very much in this direction to try to
justify this idea of infinite decimals as infinite
choice objects next time we're going to look at
that second approach to infinite decimals which
is very different to the idea of infinite choice
the idea of an infinite decimal as an algorithmic
or computational object in fact that turns out to
be much more interesting and reasonable but
it still has some serious problems next time
we have a look at that I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening